# clinical records, patient records, health records

Clinical $$\rightarrow$$ in a single Reparto. Patient  $$\rightarrow$$  follow the patient in the recovery. Health  $$\rightarrow$$  follows the patient during all his life.

Google Health is an example of personal health record, now closed.

Patient and Health are balanced: one is responsability of the hospital, one of the patient.

Fascicolo Sanitario Elettronico (PHR, Personal Health Record) is an example of the latter. There are also personal information, included photos of moles sent to your dermatologist. Differently from EHR it can last for a whole life.( What happens to the data when someone dies? It has to be preserved for a while but then?) The users, in PHR, includes the patient, not only clinical personnel, who can share, retrieve and delete his own informations (law abiding, of course).

Interoperability will be the topic for the next weeks.

## uncertainty management

There are many issues about medical data that we have to consider. Data formats, attachments, standard language, "referto", "reperto", ambiguities.

Usually it's text or attached documents. check [wHospital](http://www.whealth.care/solutions/whospital/)

HIE : Health Information Exchange. Wanted by Obama, forced all producers of health records, and hospital, to grant interoperability between different softwares and different hospitals. It's not working very well, because private healthcare push towards patient fidelization.

Over years, trend is moving from enterprise EHRs to PHRs.

# biodata

Data, whose information is not dependant from its value over time, generated by a biological entity. It's a parameter that describe a biological system. It has a reference value to be compared with. Can be categorical, discrete, continuous, whatever. It is associated to a measure unit. It has to be healthy thresholds (max/min), that can change over years with new literature. They must be referred to a patient, of course, and a specific point in time. They often include responsible person (medic, nurse, etc.) for data and procedure recordings. Methods that produced the data itself has to been recorded, because different methods may imply different values for the same real data.  So it's never "a float", it's always a complex multivalued data structure.

### additional biodata

If I add a time dimension, I have a **signal**. If I add a space dimension, I've an **image**. If I add both, I've got a **video recording**.

Biosignals are extremely linked to how it is acquired: there is an analogic signal (continous over time and amplitude) generation, and a digital conversion (discretization over time (sampling) and amplitude (quantization)). Signals can be multichannel (different signals over the same time)

Signals are saved as arrays (1 dimension per channel, time is implicit, knowing the sampling frequency). A whole record can include many channels, and hase a lot of metadata (type of record, additional annotations, patient data, technician, time, etc).

Images can be 2D or 3D. Radiographies, PET, SPECT, NRM, CT, whatever. Quantization and sampling becomes pixels. Quantization is represented by color levels (16M colors (32bit) 256 greyscale (8 bit), 2 b/w (1 bit))

There is a safe standard for bioimage representation: [DICOM (Digital Imaging and Communication in Medicine)](http://medical.nema.org) , a *de facto* standard, that defines a series of labels for metadata, and allows for a correct representation. There is [a python library to work with DICOM files](https://pydicom.github.io/pydicom/stable/getting_started.html).  There are, sadly, different DICOM dialects, that reduces interoperability: DICOM viewers could not open a specific DICOM file.

### PACS

#### Picture Archiving and Communication System

Centralized repository for ALL bioimagery in an hospital, from all sources. It permits visualization and extraction of images in EPR. They are usually *ad hoc* solutions, expensive, interfaced with the hospital information system. It implements DICOM viewers, but the main aim is storage. 

DICOM is not just the image, but also "communication", that includes all the messages used to exchange images between the imaging system and the PACS. 

### biorecordings

Video recordings, includes a time variant. They come from ecography, angiography, etc. They are just a sequence of images. All the images could be memorized (ecocardiography, endoscopy) or just few screenshots could be acquired (angiography), in the last case time is not uniformly varied, and can be treated as bioimages.

For both images and recordings, DICOM provides a compression algorithm. 

# Text documents

Beyond the concept of medical data, we have to consider **medical documents**. It includes the plain text, but has to include a lot of metadata.  

* Biomedical data:
  * Value (raw data)
  * How it was created
  * Environment of creation
  * Who is responsibile of creation
  * Who is te owner (patient)
  * Why was it created
  * Reference values at the moment of recording
* Biomedical document
  * Heading
  * Who is it written for
  * Text
  * Signature of responsibile person
  * Authentication

Different parts for different aims.

#### heading

Who is competent for the data, and is emitting the document. There are lists ("Albi") of real intestations, like lists of hospitals in Regione, list of firms in Camera di Commercio, etc.

Both the hospital and the Reparto are included (including director of Reparto, and contacts.). It states implicitly where the original document is preserved.

#### destination

Usually the person whom the document is written for is the **patient**, even if it is effectively used by other people/specialists/clinicians. 

#### content

Usually it's plain text, stating/declaring things. There is a ID number, that allows other specialists to access remotely the original content.

Special content: **scheda di dimissione ospedaliera (SDO)**: it is given to the patient leaving the hospital, when the patient is admitted, even for day hospital. It includes everything but the information on drugs: clinical aspects, diagnostics, symptoms, surgeries, diagnostic/therapeutic processes, prosthetics; Operative Units visited, internal transfers, dismission date, etc. Usually not aimed to the patient, but created for administrative purposes and rendicontation. 

#### signature

The signature of the medic/technician who generated the statement. There could be a stamp too, and the writing "Copia conforme all'originale", because the original version is digital, and never given away. The signature itself is not sufficient...

#### authentication

Signatures needs to be authenticated: usually a Notaio, Segretario Comunale, public officier or generic witness is needed. There are digital authentication algorithms used to validated the signature (electronic signature).



## Electronic signature and CAD (Codice dell'amministrazione digitale)

10 years old, it states he juridic validity of digital document. Documents must be signed:

* electronic signature (name and last name, scan of ID card, etc)
* advanced electronic signature (tablet signature in a bank)
* qualified electronic signature (advanced, + a qualified certificate, created on a secure device)
* digital signature (based on a set of public/private cryptographic keys, that encrypts the document)

All documents signed with the last three are considered valid. Copies are considered "conformi" where not otherwise explicitly specified. A username/password system is a type of advanced electronic signature, because the password was given while identifying the person. A password sent by SMS or a 2 factor authentication is fine, because your phone number is certified to be owned by you.

DICOM metadata includes tens of fields, about image, machinery, patient, acquisition parameters, etc. There are few fields `SOPClassUID`, `SOPInstanceUID` used to communicate with pertinent PACS. 

### document text structuring

The text of the document could be plain, or structured in a table. The latter option can force information insertion, and can be helpful to compress data. It helps comprehension from more professionals, it can be indexed and searched, it allows information reuse, it can help with semantical contextualization of informations, and allows comparation between different documents.

Unstructured text can be written in non-standard language, but can be structured by NLP techniques. It improves comprehension and add flexibility.

To solve the issue of unstructured text, a standard was created.

# HL7

HL7 is a clinical document architecture (CDA). Inside HL7, free text still remain a gold standard, in certain portions of it. A structured document converts the plain text in a tree-organized data structure with many fields (patient history, etc.) with some subsection (presenting complains, significant diseases, traumatic injuries) leading to a serie of coded concept ([C1384666] Hearing impairment, etc). The [C1384666] is a SNOMED(?) code, standardized. 

A serie of techniques of NLP has beed deployed to automatically structure text. [Example](http://linguistic-annotation-tool.italianlp.it/).  Few basics of NLP were given.  In some case studies, NLP algorithms performed much better to extract information from unstructured EHR compared from querying structured EHR.

